	SQUASHFS-TOOLS 4.7 - A squashed read-only filesystem for Linux

	Copyright 2002-2025 Phillip Lougher <phillip@squashfs.org.uk>

	Released under the GPL licence (version 2 or later).

Welcome to Squashfs-Tools 4.7.  The last release was two years ago, and there
are substantial improvements to the tools in this release, in particular
Mksquashfs can be 20% to more than six times faster (dependant on source
media and files).  The help system has also been completely rewritten and
improved for Mksquashfs/Unsquashfs/Sqfstar/Sqfscat.

Please see the top-level INSTALL file for instructions on installing the tools,
and the USAGE files in this directory for information on how to use the tools.

This README will describe the improvements, and has the following sections:

1. Summary of changes
2. Parallel file reading and options
3. Help system and options
4. Author info

1. Summary of changes
---------------------

1. Mksquashfs now reads files in parallel from the input directories

   1.1. This can significantly increase I/O when reading lots of small files,
        and/or the input benefits from parallel reading e.g. modern SSD drives,
        or network filesystems etc.
   1.2. New -small-readers option to specify number of parallel small file
        reader threads (files less than a block size).  Default 8 threads.
   1.3. New -block-readers option to specify number of parallel block reader
        threads (files one block or larger).  Default 3 threads.
   1.4. New -single-reader option to specify a single reader thread, similar to
        previous Mksquashfs versions.

2. Rewritten and improved help system (Mksquashfs/Unsquashfs/Sqfstar/Sqfscat)

   2.1. Help text now uses the full width of the terminal (rather than being
        pre-formatted to 80 columns).
   2.2. The output is now automatically paged (by defaut uses less).
   2.3. The tools now print a summary on failure to parse the command line or
        encountering other errors that prevent the tool from running, rather
        than displaying the help text.
   2.4. The help text can be displayed in full, by section, or by option using
        regex matching.
   2.5. New -help-all option to display all help text
   2.6. New -help-section option to display help for a particular section
   2.7. New -help-option to display all options matching regex.
   2.8. New -help-comp option to display compressor options for given
        compressor.

3. Other improvements for Mksquashfs/Sqfstar

   3.1. New -force-file-mode option, which sets all file (non-directory)
        permissions to the given mode.
   3.2. New -force-dir-mode option, which sets all directory permissions to
        the given mode.
   3.3. -root-mode and above new -force-file-mode/-force-dir-mode options
        now take a symbolic mode in addition to an octal mode.
   3.4. New -info-file option, which prints files written to the filesystem to
        a file rather than stdout.  Allows -info-file to be used in conjunction
        with the progress bar.
   3.5. New -pseudo-dir (or -pd) option which supplies a default directory
        if any directories in a pseudo definition pathname don't exist.
   3.6. New pseudo file 'h' definition which creates a hard link to a file,
        and follows symbolic links.
   3.7. Previously if a directory was missing (or not a directory) in a
        Pseudo definition pathname, the pseudo definition would be ignored.
        This has been hardened to a fatal error.

4. Other improvements for Unsquashfs/Sqfscat

   4.1. New -mem option, which sets the amount of memory to be used,
        K, M and G can be used to specify Kbytes, Mbytes and Gbytes.
   4.2. New -mem-percent option, which sets the anount of memory to be
        used as percentage of available physical memory.
   4.3. Memory specified is limited to 75% of physical memory or less.

5. New environment variable SQFS_CMDLINE (Mksquashfs/Unsquashfs/Sqfstar/Sqfscat)

   If set, this is used as the directory to write the file sqfs_cmdline
   which contains the command line arguments given to Mksquashfs etc.  Intended
   to be used to debug scripts/discover what is being passed to Mksquashfs.


2. Parallel file reading and options
------------------------------------

3. Help system and options
--------------------------

4. AUTHOR INFO
--------------

Squashfs was written by Phillip Lougher, email phillip@squashfs.org.uk,
in Chepstow, Wales, UK.   If you like the program, or have any problems,
then please email me, as it's nice to get feedback!
